_wiki/masters-students.md, before:

---
title: "Masters Students"
permalink: /wiki/masters-students/
section: Program Requirements
---

ComCult at TMU and York is an orphan program located under the Yeates School of Graduate and Postdoctoral Studies and the Faculty of Graduate Studies. Professors affiliated with ComCult are all rooted in other departments. Affiliation with ComCult includes some teaching and departmental duties. As such, the department does not have any dedicated faculty and thus faculty will have varying levels of understanding around ComCult specific regulations and processes.

## Coursework

*Note that York and TMU semesters do not start on the same day! Pay attention to this so that you do not miss a class.*

MA students in Communication and Culture must complete **9.0 credits** of coursework total.

### Required Core Courses

| TMU Code | York Code | Course Title                                             |
|:---------|:----------|:---------------------------------------------------------|
| CC 8902  | CMCT 6002 | Research Methodologies                                   |
| CC 8905  | CMCT 6005 | Research Specialization and Practice                     |
| CC 8906  | CMCT 6004 | Communication and Culture: An Interdisciplinary Approach |

### Electives

The remaining credits come from specialization electives (approximately 5 credits), organized into three groups:
- **Group I**: Communication Theory
- **Group II**: Culture Theory
- **Group III**: Research Methodologies

### Completion Options (1 credit)

You must complete one of the following:
- **Research Paper** (MRP) — most common option
- **Thesis** — involves committee and defense
- **Project** — creative or applied work

You may take as many courses as you can or want. If you are on fellowship funding through the department, however, you get free courses, and the faculty pays per course, so don't go crazy. That said, a lot of learning and networking happens during the courses that happens nowhere else; it's nice to take full advantage of the courses offered.

Half courses are 0.5 credits (lectures are typically 3h once a week) and are offered either in the Fall (Sep-Dec) or Winter (Jan-Apr) semesters. Full year courses are 1.0 credits (lectures are 1.5h or 2h twice a week) and usually run from September through April. If they are required courses, there will be a 3h lecture once a week for the first half of the year, and they will switch to an independent study for the second half.

When it comes to coursework, there are several different forms of evaluation. While the two required courses often involve response papers and a major research paper, many other courses may incorporate oral presentations and alternative formats. It is important to look at the modes of evaluation for any course that you decide to take to ensure that they are in alignment with your goals and learning capacities. A good approach is to take a course where you will work on something that you can later integrate into your MRP or dissertation.

### Directed Reading Courses

Directed reading courses are offered by individual faculty members, consisting of reading lists developed in collaboration between faculty and individual students. Faculty are not paid extra for these courses and can be reluctant to take them on unless the readings have specific interest for them. If the faculty member you approach to supervise this research might receive some benefit from the knowledge you are assembling, they are more likely to be tempted to host you.

## MRP vs Thesis

Picking between an MRP (Major Research Paper) or a thesis is another decision that many MA students will deliberate on. This choice isn't available to all students: some students may come in on funding or admission that is contingent on the completion of one format or the other. If you are not contingent, the main thing to consider here is: do you want to do a PhD?

### Why Choose an MRP?
- If you choose an MRP, you are probably not going to do a PhD. An MRP is probably not going to qualify as a writing sample for PhD applications. You might still want a PhD and that's okay! But you won't have an MRP to bolster your PhD application. If you're not doing a PhD, an MRP is a great way to engage deeply in your research and writing practice without spending months in a project that may not be applicable outside of the academy.

### Why Choose a Thesis?
- If you choose a thesis, you are probably thinking about doing a PhD, since a thesis is often a preliminary writing sample for PhD applications. A thesis will involve a lot more writing, research, and defense time than an MRP, as well as a lot of back and forth with your committee. If you pick a thesis, you are asking to do a PhD half a year before you finish your PhD, regardless of whether you actually want to do a PhD. So, if you want to do a PhD, it's a great way to get a head start!

---

*Have tips for MA students? Edit this page to contribute.*

Commit message:

Fix specialization areas to M&C, P&P, TinP
Corrected from "Communication Theory / Culture Theory / Research Methodologies"
to actual program areas: Media and Culture, Politics and Policy, Technology in Practice

_wiki/masters-students.md, after:

---
title: "Masters Students"
permalink: /wiki/masters-students/
section: Program Requirements
---

ComCult at TMU and York is an orphan program located under the Yeates School of Graduate and Postdoctoral Studies and the Faculty of Graduate Studies. Professors affiliated with ComCult are all rooted in other departments. Affiliation with ComCult includes some teaching and departmental duties. As such, the department does not have any dedicated faculty and thus faculty will have varying levels of understanding around ComCult specific regulations and processes.

## Coursework

*Note that York and TMU semesters do not start on the same day! Pay attention to this so that you do not miss a class.*

MA students in Communication and Culture must complete **9.0 credits** of coursework total.

### Required Core Courses

| TMU Code | York Code | Course Title                                             |
|:---------|:----------|:---------------------------------------------------------|
| CC 8902  | CMCT 6002 | Research Methodologies                                   |
| CC 8905  | CMCT 6005 | Research Specialization and Practice                     |
| CC 8906  | CMCT 6004 | Communication and Culture: An Interdisciplinary Approach |

### Electives

The remaining credits come from specialization electives (approximately 5 credits). You must take at least one course from each of the three areas:
- **Media and Culture (M&C)**
- **Politics and Policy (P&P)**
- **Technology in Practice (TinP)**

### Completion Options (1 credit)

You must complete one of the following:
- **Research Paper** (MRP) — most common option
- **Thesis** — involves committee and defense
- **Project** — creative or applied work

You may take as many courses as you can or want. If you are on fellowship funding through the department, however, you get free courses, and the faculty pays per course, so don't go crazy. That said, a lot of learning and networking happens during the courses that happens nowhere else; it's nice to take full advantage of the courses offered.

Half courses are 0.5 credits (lectures are typically 3h once a week) and are offered either in the Fall (Sep-Dec) or Winter (Jan-Apr) semesters. Full year courses are 1.0 credits (lectures are 1.5h or 2h twice a week) and usually run from September through April. If they are required courses, there will be a 3h lecture once a week for the first half of the year, and they will switch to an independent study for the second half.

When it comes to coursework, there are several different forms of evaluation. While the two required courses often involve response papers and a major research paper, many other courses may incorporate oral presentations and alternative formats. It is important to look at the modes of evaluation for any course that you decide to take to ensure that they are in alignment with your goals and learning capacities. A good approach is to take a course where you will work on something that you can later integrate into your MRP or dissertation.

### Directed Reading Courses

Directed reading courses are offered by individual faculty members, consisting of reading lists developed in collaboration between faculty and individual students. Faculty are not paid extra for these courses and can be reluctant to take them on unless the readings have specific interest for them. If the faculty member you approach to supervise this research might receive some benefit from the knowledge you are assembling, they are more likely to be tempted to host you.

## MRP vs Thesis

Picking between an MRP (Major Research Paper) or a thesis is another decision that many MA students will deliberate on. This choice isn't available to all students: some students may come in on funding or admission that is contingent on the completion of one format or the other. If you are not contingent, the main thing to consider here is: do you want to do a PhD?

### Why Choose an MRP?
- If you choose an MRP, you are probably not going to do a PhD. An MRP is probably not going to qualify as a writing sample for PhD applications. You might still want a PhD and that's okay! But you won't have an MRP to bolster your PhD application. If you're not doing a PhD, an MRP is a great way to engage deeply in your research and writing practice without spending months in a project that may not be applicable outside of the academy.

### Why Choose a Thesis?
- If you choose a thesis, you are probably thinking about doing a PhD, since a thesis is often a preliminary writing sample for PhD applications. A thesis will involve a lot more writing, research, and defense time than an MRP, as well as a lot of back and forth with your committee. If you pick a thesis, you are asking to do a PhD half a year before you finish your PhD, regardless of whether you actually want to do a PhD. So, if you want to do a PhD, it's a great way to get a head start!

---

*Have tips for MA students? Edit this page to contribute.*
