_wiki/phd-students.md, before:

---
title: "PhD Students"
permalink: /wiki/phd-students/
section: Program Requirements
---

ComCult at TMU and York is an orphan program located under the Yeates School of Graduate and Postdoctoral Studies and the Faculty of Graduate Studies. Professors affiliated with ComCult are rooted in other departments. Affiliation with ComCult includes some teaching and departmental duties. As such, the department does not have any dedicated faculty and thus faculty will have varying levels of understanding around ComCult specific regulations and processes.

## Reading and Study

There is no one way to be an academic. Most academic pipelines are more interested in outcomes rather than the processes, but that doesn't mean that processes aren't important. The difficulty in defining an academic process is that it will be different for each person.

Some folks will binge read while in the bath at 1:00 AM, while others will create a rigorous schedule for reading, say between 3-4 hours daily in a routine. There is no guarantee that either technique will produce better scholarship. However, a desirable end remains: that you learn and know more than you knew before. How do you learn best? What techniques allow you to remain interested and engaged in readings and study? What time of day do you feel the most alert and focused? How long can you sit before you get antsy? What kinds of environments lead to productivity?

### Helpful Techniques

- **Body doubling:** sitting with other folks in quiet study. This can help to keep accountable and on task, while also remaining connected to other scholars.
- **The Pomodoro Technique:** setting a timer for 20 minute sessions with 10 minute breaks. This can help to break up study sessions into digestible chunks while also preventing blood clots and keeping your body healthy!

### On Discernment

One essential skill that all academics need to develop is discernment. You cannot know or remember everything. There is too much information in the world to know it all, even within one discipline. This means that you need to make decisions about what you believe it is important to know. You are going to become an expert during your course of study and that means you are not just training in the information of your discipline, but in your discernment of that discipline. Through study, you are going to become the arbiter of what is important and relevant and what is not.

How do you do that without being an expert? You must make an educated guess and the best way to do that is relying on your own innate discernment that you will hone and train as you go along. We all make mistakes and that is how we learn. Make choices based on what you find the most interesting and then try to expand from there. If you find yourself curious about a contrary opinion, seek that out. Your own curiosity can help you to flesh out your understanding of a subject.

### Reading Strategies

- Read the introductory and concluding sections of books, skipping the inside entirely
- Read the opening and concluding sections of each individual chapter
- Start at the end of a paper and quickly skim each paragraph backwards to avoid being caught up in the flow of ideas
- Supplement your understanding using secondary scholarship and book reviews
- Read specifically according to your questions, skipping material not directly correlated with your topic of interest
- Reading selfishly can help you to weed out material that may be interesting, but not particularly relevant to your purposes

Reading alone will not bring understanding. Rather, you must learn how to understand. It is intelligent to feel nervous and overwhelmed. Each subject matter involves a massive amount of scholarship and you are entering into that scholarship as a peer. You are capable of knowing. The words you read are merely maps to the paths that others have taken. Use these to interpret and discern your own path through knowledge, but remember that knowing is about more than maps.

### Taking Notes

Taking notes enables you to maintain a record of what you have learned. It is difficult to translate note-taking skills between different students when their learning styles and capacities differ significantly. Some techniques work for one person and not for others. Part of the difficulty of developing a scholarly practice is learning how you learn and making that work for you. You will not be the same kind of scholar as others and that is your strength.

One simple way of taking notes is to quickly summarize each section from memory as you read it. This enables a quick reference for what you have learned that also enables you to practice articulating the ideas in your own words. It might be helpful to create a scratch-pad where you note any proper terms, summarize their meanings and map mentions of other important scholars. This helps you to build a reference of which areas of discourse are current and important to the field. Highlighting interesting sections can also help you when you come back to readings, enabling you to quickly relocate these areas of interest.

For those who use AI, this can be helpful to summarise readings, however, it is important to add your own insights and to correct foundations that may make incorrect assumptions about the materials. AI is not thinking but predicting. The predictions of AI can hallucinate and may misinterpret the finer details. Writing notes is as much about recording information as it is about repeating information so that it sticks in your memory. If you use AI to make summaries, you might use key-word lookups to find references in the material and then summarize in your own words to make sure you remember what was said.

## Coursework

*Note that York and TMU semesters do not start on the same day! Pay attention to this so that you do not miss a class.*

The [Course Schedule is available here](https://www.torontomu.ca/graduate/programs/comcult/forms-resources/), under the section COURSE ENROLLMENT.

PhD students in Communication and Culture must complete **6.0 credits** of coursework (typically 6 one-credit courses or equivalent).

### Required Courses

The following core courses are required:

| TMU Code | York Code | Course Title                                |
|:---------|:----------|:--------------------------------------------|
| CC 9900  | CMCT 7200 | Advanced Research Methodologies             |
| CC 9904  | CMCT 7000 | Perspectives in Communication and Culture   |
| CC 9906  | CMCT 7005 | PhD Field Seminar: Disciplinary Practice    |

The remaining credits come from specialization electives, which are organized into three groups:
- **Group I**: Communication Theory
- **Group II**: Culture Theory
- **Group III**: Research Methodologies

You may take courses at either York or TMU. When selecting courses, consider:

- Alignment with your research interests
- Building comprehensive exam reading lists
- Developing methodological skills
- Networking with faculty in your field

**Note for TMU students:** Do not register for York courses via their infrastructure. Go through TMU ComCult procedures. You can register via the York infrastructures but will be charged for your courses and will make the TMU admin salty.

### External Courses

When the courses on offer are not adequate to your study, you are able to take courses outside of the ComCult department. This might be the best route for those with topics of study that requires specific forms of inquiry. You can often review the curriculum or courses on offer on departmental websites. When you find a course that you want to take, the department administrator can then help to facilitate this connection. You may be required to correspond with the professor and administrator to help facilitate your attendance if you do not have the prerequisite for a course. You may be allowed to take a course without a prerequisite if you can demonstrate competence in the area.

When taking classes outside of ComCult, you will also be sending a random form to a professor at another department and they may be startled and disoriented by your request. At York, you register and enroll in classes for Fall and Winter terms at the same time, but register for summer separately later on in the year. At TMU you register for the whole year, but can choose to change your course selections in either case, though class openings may quickly fill up for desirable courses.

### Auditing Courses

You can audit two graduate or undergraduate courses in any discipline. Formally audited courses will be listed on your transcript as "AUD" and will not be given a grade, as you will not be doing any of the assignments. You may also informally audit large enough courses by simply showing up to (larger) lectures and remaining respectful.

### Directed Reading Courses

Directed reading courses are offered by individual faculty members. You make reading lists developed in a collaboration between you and your sponsor. You get to pick the topic and design a course of your own. Since faculty are not paid for these courses, they may be reluctant to take on work in excess of their regular duties. You may have more luck if you tailor your readings to their specific interests. It can be helpful to demonstrate how your research helps them to advance their own goals, as well as keeping them relevant. Faculty/student relationships at the PhD level can benefit from learning how to work with others professionally, so this can be a good time to learn how to provide benefits while also receiving mentorship.

## Program Milestones

### Year 1-2
- Complete required coursework
- Secure supervisor
- Form supervisory committee
- Develop research focus

### Year 2-3
- Complete comprehensive examinations
- Write and defend dissertation proposal
- Apply for external funding (SSHRC, OGS)

### Year 3+
- Conduct dissertation research
- Write dissertation chapters
- Present at conferences
- Prepare for job market
- Defend dissertation

## Key Differences from MA

- More coursework required
- Comprehensive examinations
- Dissertation (not MRP)
- Longer timeline (4-6+ years)
- Different funding structure

See the specific sections on [Comprehensive Exams]({{ '/wiki/comprehensive-exams/' | relative_url }}), [Dissertation Proposal]({{ '/wiki/dissertation-proposal/' | relative_url }}), and [Dissertation]({{ '/wiki/dissertation/' | relative_url }}) for detailed information on each milestone.

---

*Have advice for PhD students? Edit this page to contribute.*

Commit message:

Fix specialization areas to M&C, P&P, TinP
Corrected from "Communication Theory / Culture Theory / Research Methodologies"
to actual program areas: Media and Culture, Politics and Policy, Technology in Practice

_wiki/phd-students.md, after:

---
title: "PhD Students"
permalink: /wiki/phd-students/
section: Program Requirements
---

ComCult at TMU and York is an orphan program located under the Yeates School of Graduate and Postdoctoral Studies and the Faculty of Graduate Studies. Professors affiliated with ComCult are rooted in other departments. Affiliation with ComCult includes some teaching and departmental duties. As such, the department does not have any dedicated faculty and thus faculty will have varying levels of understanding around ComCult specific regulations and processes.

## Reading and Study

There is no one way to be an academic. Most academic pipelines are more interested in outcomes rather than the processes, but that doesn't mean that processes aren't important. The difficulty in defining an academic process is that it will be different for each person.

Some folks will binge read while in the bath at 1:00 AM, while others will create a rigorous schedule for reading, say between 3-4 hours daily in a routine. There is no guarantee that either technique will produce better scholarship. However, a desirable end remains: that you learn and know more than you knew before. How do you learn best? What techniques allow you to remain interested and engaged in readings and study? What time of day do you feel the most alert and focused? How long can you sit before you get antsy? What kinds of environments lead to productivity?

### Helpful Techniques

- **Body doubling:** sitting with other folks in quiet study. This can help to keep accountable and on task, while also remaining connected to other scholars.
- **The Pomodoro Technique:** setting a timer for 20 minute sessions with 10 minute breaks. This can help to break up study sessions into digestible chunks while also preventing blood clots and keeping your body healthy!

### On Discernment

One essential skill that all academics need to develop is discernment. You cannot know or remember everything. There is too much information in the world to know it all, even within one discipline. This means that you need to make decisions about what you believe it is important to know. You are going to become an expert during your course of study and that means you are not just training in the information of your discipline, but in your discernment of that discipline. Through study, you are going to become the arbiter of what is important and relevant and what is not.

How do you do that without being an expert? You must make an educated guess and the best way to do that is relying on your own innate discernment that you will hone and train as you go along. We all make mistakes and that is how we learn. Make choices based on what you find the most interesting and then try to expand from there. If you find yourself curious about a contrary opinion, seek that out. Your own curiosity can help you to flesh out your understanding of a subject.

### Reading Strategies

- Read the introductory and concluding sections of books, skipping the inside entirely
- Read the opening and concluding sections of each individual chapter
- Start at the end of a paper and quickly skim each paragraph backwards to avoid being caught up in the flow of ideas
- Supplement your understanding using secondary scholarship and book reviews
- Read specifically according to your questions, skipping material not directly correlated with your topic of interest
- Reading selfishly can help you to weed out material that may be interesting, but not particularly relevant to your purposes

Reading alone will not bring understanding. Rather, you must learn how to understand. It is intelligent to feel nervous and overwhelmed. Each subject matter involves a massive amount of scholarship and you are entering into that scholarship as a peer. You are capable of knowing. The words you read are merely maps to the paths that others have taken. Use these to interpret and discern your own path through knowledge, but remember that knowing is about more than maps.

### Taking Notes

Taking notes enables you to maintain a record of what you have learned. It is difficult to translate note-taking skills between different students when their learning styles and capacities differ significantly. Some techniques work for one person and not for others. Part of the difficulty of developing a scholarly practice is learning how you learn and making that work for you. You will not be the same kind of scholar as others and that is your strength.

One simple way of taking notes is to quickly summarize each section from memory as you read it. This enables a quick reference for what you have learned that also enables you to practice articulating the ideas in your own words. It might be helpful to create a scratch-pad where you note any proper terms, summarize their meanings and map mentions of other important scholars. This helps you to build a reference of which areas of discourse are current and important to the field. Highlighting interesting sections can also help you when you come back to readings, enabling you to quickly relocate these areas of interest.

For those who use AI, this can be helpful to summarise readings, however, it is important to add your own insights and to correct foundations that may make incorrect assumptions about the materials. AI is not thinking but predicting. The predictions of AI can hallucinate and may misinterpret the finer details. Writing notes is as much about recording information as it is about repeating information so that it sticks in your memory. If you use AI to make summaries, you might use key-word lookups to find references in the material and then summarize in your own words to make sure you remember what was said.

## Coursework

*Note that York and TMU semesters do not start on the same day! Pay attention to this so that you do not miss a class.*

The [Course Schedule is available here](https://www.torontomu.ca/graduate/programs/comcult/forms-resources/), under the section COURSE ENROLLMENT.

PhD students in Communication and Culture must complete **6.0 credits** of coursework (typically 6 one-credit courses or equivalent).

### Required Courses

The following core courses are required:

| TMU Code | York Code | Course Title                                |
|:---------|:----------|:--------------------------------------------|
| CC 9900  | CMCT 7200 | Advanced Research Methodologies             |
| CC 9904  | CMCT 7000 | Perspectives in Communication and Culture   |
| CC 9906  | CMCT 7005 | PhD Field Seminar: Disciplinary Practice    |

The remaining credits come from specialization electives. You choose a major (minimum 2 half-courses) and minor (minimum 1 half-course) from these three areas:
- **Media and Culture (M&C)**
- **Politics and Policy (P&P)**
- **Technology in Practice (TinP)**

You may take courses at either York or TMU. When selecting courses, consider:

- Alignment with your research interests
- Building comprehensive exam reading lists
- Developing methodological skills
- Networking with faculty in your field

**Note for TMU students:** Do not register for York courses via their infrastructure. Go through TMU ComCult procedures. You can register via the York infrastructures but will be charged for your courses and will make the TMU admin salty.

### External Courses

When the courses on offer are not adequate to your study, you are able to take courses outside of the ComCult department. This might be the best route for those with topics of study that requires specific forms of inquiry. You can often review the curriculum or courses on offer on departmental websites. When you find a course that you want to take, the department administrator can then help to facilitate this connection. You may be required to correspond with the professor and administrator to help facilitate your attendance if you do not have the prerequisite for a course. You may be allowed to take a course without a prerequisite if you can demonstrate competence in the area.

When taking classes outside of ComCult, you will also be sending a random form to a professor at another department and they may be startled and disoriented by your request. At York, you register and enroll in classes for Fall and Winter terms at the same time, but register for summer separately later on in the year. At TMU you register for the whole year, but can choose to change your course selections in either case, though class openings may quickly fill up for desirable courses.

### Auditing Courses

You can audit two graduate or undergraduate courses in any discipline. Formally audited courses will be listed on your transcript as "AUD" and will not be given a grade, as you will not be doing any of the assignments. You may also informally audit large enough courses by simply showing up to (larger) lectures and remaining respectful.

### Directed Reading Courses

Directed reading courses are offered by individual faculty members. You make reading lists developed in a collaboration between you and your sponsor. You get to pick the topic and design a course of your own. Since faculty are not paid for these courses, they may be reluctant to take on work in excess of their regular duties. You may have more luck if you tailor your readings to their specific interests. It can be helpful to demonstrate how your research helps them to advance their own goals, as well as keeping them relevant. Faculty/student relationships at the PhD level can benefit from learning how to work with others professionally, so this can be a good time to learn how to provide benefits while also receiving mentorship.

## Program Milestones

### Year 1-2
- Complete required coursework
- Secure supervisor
- Form supervisory committee
- Develop research focus

### Year 2-3
- Complete comprehensive examinations
- Write and defend dissertation proposal
- Apply for external funding (SSHRC, OGS)

### Year 3+
- Conduct dissertation research
- Write dissertation chapters
- Present at conferences
- Prepare for job market
- Defend dissertation

## Key Differences from MA

- More coursework required
- Comprehensive examinations
- Dissertation (not MRP)
- Longer timeline (4-6+ years)
- Different funding structure

See the specific sections on [Comprehensive Exams]({{ '/wiki/comprehensive-exams/' | relative_url }}), [Dissertation Proposal]({{ '/wiki/dissertation-proposal/' | relative_url }}), and [Dissertation]({{ '/wiki/dissertation/' | relative_url }}) for detailed information on each milestone.

---

*Have advice for PhD students? Edit this page to contribute.*
